---
layout: post
title:  "A Discussion of Digital Civics in the Context of Austerity"
date:   2019-10-24 12:54:45 +0100
image: digitalcivics.png
categories: research ourplace
---

Much of [my research](/ourplace) takes place as a part of the 'Digital Civics
Agenda'. This post gives a brief synopsis on what Digital Civics is about, and
why we as researchers and technology developers need to be aware of how our work
can be interpreted in a wider political context.

### What is the Digital Civics Research Agenda?

As a result of the economic crisis and resulting austerity measures enacted by
the UK government over the last decade, many local authorities have been forced
to implement severe cuts to their public services (including--but not limited
to--waste management, transport, parks and recreation, education and social
care). Olivier and Wright developed the Digital Civics research agenda at
Culture Lab (later renamed to _Open Lab_, where my research took place)
as a direct response to these developments, claiming that as a research group in
a civic university (one which is _'embedded in, and responsive to, its
local context'_) they were 'compelled' to reflect on how their HCI research
could be of use and value to the local authorities and citizens [1]. Prior to
the Digital Civics agenda, Culture Lab's research had been human-centred and
participatory, providing systems and services which were both meaningful and
helpful. However, they reflected that their work had been detached from the
local context---the research often _'failed to extend beyond the confines'_ of
their projects, meaning that it frequently could have been done anywhere. They
also realised that they were only working within (and, as a result,
proliferating) the status quo of service delivery from institution to citizens:
they were giving people some input on the design of products, but in a way which
still supported the framing of public services as being something 'done to'
citizens without providing any alternative models. Digital Civics moves away
from framing citizens as consumers and towards a model where citizens can take
an active role within participatory systems, thanks to new forms of
relationships between citizens, businesses and local authorities. Olivier and
Wright admit that meaningful, systemic change such as this will take
significant amounts of time. Even within the smaller scope of research projects,
they posit that the development of long-term relationships between researchers,
citizens and local authorities will be necessary if new relational models are to
be realised and the potential roles for technology within them discovered. 

### The Context Behind Digital Civics

Olivier and Wright note that there is also a danger of the Digital Civics agenda
being warped or misconstrued as _'finding ways of making citizens do it for
themselves, or dismantling public service provision'_. Digital Civics was
imagined in the context of a period of austerity. As a part of this, many
changes were put in place by the UK's conservative government under the guise of
localism---part of David Cameron's 'Big Society' initiative which purportedly
aimed to give local authorities the power to undertake local solutions to local
problems, rather than continue to centralise power in Parliament. This agenda
was ratified in the Localism Act of 2011, which de-regulated and/or removed many
of the constraints related to local issues of housing and taxes [2], and
coincided with a number of austerity measures put onto public services and
placing greater emphasis on volunteerism. While the principle of
de-centralisation was seen as agreeable across much of the political spectrum,
the 'Big Society' approach was met with public scepticism. Polls found that over
half of respondents thought that the Big Society measures were `just an excuse'
to save money by cutting public services, and that only around 10% thought that
Big Society would be a success [3]. Furthermore, while the restructuring put in
place by localism measures relied on more pro-active and engaged citizenship
from the public, some argued that not enough resources were allocated to
supporting this citizenship actually occurring. As Rogers argued at the time:
_'Most of the political problems [the Prime Minister] faces, from cutting
crime to reducing obesity, can only be met if residents and citizens play their
part. Yet the state has so far invested very little in teaching the skills that
could help people make a contribution'_ [4]. This lack of support meant that
citizens who wanted to take advantage of the powers given by the Localism Act in
areas such as town planning had to invest considerable time and effort, as their
output was to be judged to the same level as professionals [5]. These
expectations of large amounts of free time for research and volunteering would
exclude many from the empowerment promised by the legislation, particularly
those who had already been most impacted by cuts to social services and were
likely to be time-poor.

### How I Frame Digital Civics

It is within this context of volunteerism in the stead of well-funded public
services that Digital Civics must walk a thin line: between supporting citizens
living in the results of austerity and supporting the austerity measures
themselves. While in some cases there may be a danger of Digital Civics projects
being seen to re-configure the services provided by local authorities to enable
a 'small government' model, this is is not the intention of the agenda (at
least, as I have read it). This libertarian approach (in the contemporary and
primarily American sense) is completely contrary to the motivations behind
starting the research agenda in the first place: mitigating the damage done by
conservative austerity politics upon public services. Instead, Digital Civics
projects should aim to strengthen relationships between citizens and local
service providers: instead of reducing the role government has within the lives
of each citizen and relying on a `DIY' approach, it should aim to empower
citizens to have more involvement and agency within their government's
processes. This key distinction means that rather than designing in preparation
for the permanent loss of public services, Digital Civics technologies should
work to mitigate hardships inflicted by austerity measures in a way which also
implements improvements for when these measures eventually come to an end. 

### References

[1] Olivier, P. and Wright, P. (2015). Digital civics: taking a local
turn.interactions, 22(4):61–63

[2] Ministry of Housing Communities & Local Government (2011). Localism Act
2011: overview - GOV.UK
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/localism-act-2011-overview

[3] Ferragina, E. and Arrigoni, A. (2017).  The Rise and Fall of Social Capital:
Requiem for a Theory? Political Studies Review, 15(3):355–367. 

[4] Ben Rogers (2010). Cameron’s speech strongest on Big Society | Financial
Times https://www.ft.com/content/4dc03ba8-d151-11df-8422-00144feabdc0

[5] BBC Sunday Politics (2013).  Localism Act & Neighbourhood Plans May Not Work
| BBC(National Planning Policy Framework) - YouTube
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fP7hu41smYw 